.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020-2022 Donovan Watteau
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
.\" of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
.\" in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
.\" to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
.\" OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN
.\" THE SOFTWARE.
.Dd $Mdocdate: November 19 2020 $
.Dt FONTXY 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm FontXY
.Nd adjust glyph dimensions inside SCUMM fonts
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm FontXY
.Cm i
.Ar CHARFILE
.Nm FontXY
.Cm o
.Ar CHARFILE
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
tool lets you adjust the relative size of each glyph (or character) inside a
SCUMM character file.
The mode of operation is chosen with one of the following options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm i
Import glyph dimensions from a
.Pa XY.txt
file into the specified
.Ar CHARFILE
block.
.It Cm o
Export glyph dimensions from the specified
.Ar CHARFILE
block into a
.Pa XY.txt
file.
.El
.Pp
.Ar CHARFILE
must be a
.Dq CHAR_*
SCUMM block, as extracted by
.Xr scummrp 1 .
.Pp
Glyph dimensions are represented as a series of
.Ql X;Y
coordinates, relative to zero, each glyph being separated by a new line.
Empty glyphs are represented as empty lines.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr scummfont 1
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
tool was written in 2006 by Thomas Combeleran for the ATP team,
and was open-sourced in 2020 under the MIT license.
.Sh CAVEATS
Only newline characters native to the current platform are accepted
(CRLF on Windows and LF on most other systems).
.Pp
.Pa XY.txt
pathname is hardcoded.
