.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020-2022 Donovan Watteau
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
.\" of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
.\" in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
.\" to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
.\" OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN
.\" THE SOFTWARE.
.Dd $Mdocdate: December 27 2020 $
.Dt SCUMMTR 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm scummtr
.Nd import and export fan translations for SCUMM engine games
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm scummtr
.Fl i
.Op Fl bcqvw
.Op Fl l Ar language
.Fl g Ar gameid
.Fl p Ar gamedir
.Fl f Ar input
.Nm scummtr
.Fl o
.Op Fl bchHInqvw
.Op Fl a Ar restypes
.Op Fl A Ar restypes
.Op Fl l Ar language
.Fl g Ar gameid
.Fl p Ar gamedir
.Fl f Ar output
.Nm scummtr
.Fl L
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
tool imports and exports text for SCUMM engine games.
The mode of operation is chosen with one of the following options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl i
Import text into the game data files.
.It Fl o
Export text from the game data files.
.It Fl L
List all supported games with their respective
.Ar gameid .
.El
.Pp
The other options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Dslanguage
.It Fl a Ar restypes
Protect the specified SCUMM resource types with extra padding, when
exporting.
.Pp
Some game resources are created with a short name and use a longer
name later in the game.
In such cases,
.Ql @
padding characters must be added to prevent game errors when the resource
is renamed (this is especially true with the original interpreters).
The
.Fl a
option does this action automatically.
.Pp
Valid resource types for the
.Fl a
option are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic a
Pad actor resources.
.It Ic o
Pad object resources.
.It Ic v
Pad verb resources.
.El
.It Fl A Ar restypes
Same as
.Fl a ,
with variable IDs taken into account.
This protects even more resources, at the cost of a slight memory increase
which is negligible nowadays.
.Pp
Using
.Fl A Ar aov
by default is recommended.
.It Fl b
Translation file will be handled in binary mode, instead of text.
.Pp
Note that this makes most other options inoperative.
This flag may not correctly work with all games.
.It Fl c
Ease the use of some Western European characters, by interpreting
the text in the Windows-1252 encoding.
If neither
.Fl c
nor
.Fl r
is used,
non-ASCII characters will be handled as escape sequences.
.Pp
Note that you can only use the characters available in
your current SCUMM fonts.
.It Fl f Ar file
The path to the translation file (default:
.Pa scummtr.txt ) .
.It Fl g Ar gameid
The ID of the game variant to be translated, as given by
.Fl L .
.It Fl h
Include a small header at the start of each line, indicating the
script/block context of the current string.
.Pp
It starts with the room number (e.g.\&
.Dq "001:" ) ,
then the SCUMM object type (e.g.\&
.Dq "ONv2" ) ,
and finally the unique ID of that object (e.g.\&
.Dq "#0394" ) .
.It Fl H
Represent escape sequences as hexadecimal codes, instead of decimal codes.
.It Fl I
Include the current SCUMM instruction opcode, before each line (e.g.\&
.Dq "(D8)"
for that opcode).
.Pp
If the current string is not part of an opcode,
.Dq "(__)"
will be used.
.It Fl l Ar language
V1 and V2 games only (Maniac Mansion and Zak McKracken).
Choose the language charset to be used by
.Fl c .
.Pp
Possible values are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ic de
Original German charset.
.It Ic en
Original English charset (default).
.It Ic fr
Original French charset.
.It Ic it
Original Italian charset.
.El
.It Fl n
Never include any
.Dq ";; ScummTR note:"
comment.
.Pp
These comments are added by default to help some text editors infer
the proper encoding of the translation files, but they may interfere with
some derivative tools which do not expect them.
.Fl n
restores the original ScummTR 0.4.0 behavior of not emitting those lines.
.It Fl p Ar gamedir
The path to the game (default: current directory).
.It Fl q
Quiet mode.
Suppress informational output.
.It Fl r
Raw text.
Preserve the original text encoding of the game.
.Pp
This disables any text encoding conversion and escaping:
the text is interpreted
.Dq as-is
(except for non-printable ASCII characters and some internal
SCUMM sequences, which remain escaped),
and you must configure your text editor to recognize
the intended encoding (usually an older MS-DOS code page).
.Pp
This can be useful for non-Western-European languages.
.It Fl v
Verbose mode.
.It Fl w
Use Windows newline characters (CRLF).
This is usually compatible with more text editors, and thus recommended.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Extract the text of the original Monkey Island 2 game to a
Windows-1252 file, with added context and protected resource names:
.Pp
.Dl $ scummtr -g monkey2 -cwh -A aov -p /path/to/MI2 -of mi2_orig.txt
.Pp
Import a new French translation into the game files:
.Pp
.Dl $ scummtr -g monkey2 -cwh -A aov -p /path/to/MI2 -if mi2_fr.txt
.Pp
Extract the text of the Japanese version of Monkey Island 2 (FM-TOWNS)
in Shift_JIS, from the current directory:
.Pp
.Dl $ scummtr -g monkey2 -rw -of mi2_towns_jpn.txt
.Pp
Export the text of a German Zak McKracken V2 game, padding resources,
with default paths:
.Pp
.Dl $ scummtr -g zakv2 -l de -cw -A aov -o
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
tool was written between 2003 and 2005
by Thomas Combeleran for the ATP team,
and was open-sourced in 2020 under the MIT license.
.Sh CAVEATS
Your text editor must not remove trailing spaces or empty lines,
otherwise you will have import errors.
.Pp
Since each game and each variant of each game had its own list of
accepted characters (usually a subset of an MS-DOS code page),
it is not possible to know if a character is available without
testing it in the game.
See also
.Xr scummfont 1
in order to visualize or modify the included font tables.
.Pp
Unicode files are not supported, and non-Latin-script alphabets
need extra work for convenient use.
.Pp
On case-sensitive file systems, game data files must currently
follow the DOS convention of being all-uppercase to be properly
detected.
