.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020-2022 Donovan Watteau
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
.\" of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
.\" in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
.\" to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
.\" OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN
.\" THE SOFTWARE.
.Dd $Mdocdate: December 27 2020 $
.Dt SCUMMFONT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm scummfont
.Nd transform SCUMM fonts to bitmap image files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm scummfont
.Cm i
.Ar FONTFILE
.Ar image.bmp
.Nm scummfont
.Cm o
.Ar FONTFILE
.Ar image.bmp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
tool transforms SCUMM CHARv1 and CHARv3 font files between their internal
format and a bitmap representation.
The mode of operation is chosen with one of the following options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Cm i
Import the content of an
.Pa image.bmp
bitmap file into the specified
.Ar FONTFILE
SCUMM resource.
.It Cm o
Extract a font from a
.Ar FONTFILE
SCUMM resource into an
.Pa image.bmp
bitmap file.
.El
.Pp
.Ar FONTFILE
can either be a
.Dq CHAR_*
block extracted by
.Xr scummrp 1 ,
or an LFL file containing a font resource.
.Pp
Generated bitmap files contain every character available in the selected font.
Characters are sorted in the ascending order of the font table; that is, the
19th displayed character is always accessible in a
.Xr scummtr 1
translation file by using the
.Dq \e019
decimal sequence.
.Sh SEE ALSO
ScummImg
.Pq Lk http://www.jestarjokin.net/apps/scummimg/
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
tool was written between 2003 and 2004 by Thomas Combeleran for the ATP team,
and was open-sourced in 2020 under the MIT license.
.Sh CAVEATS
Only simple, uncompressed 8-bit per pixel BMPv3 bitmap files (also known as
Windows 3.x bitmap files) preserving the original 256-color ScummFont palette
are supported.
.Pp
Note that most modern image editors will change some settings anyway, but
ScummFont doesn't accept this, so many BMP files will be rejected, at the
moment.
.Pp
However, the GIMP image editor, with its
.Dq "Do not write color space information"
BMP export setting, can be used to edit the original BMP files while
preserving their original settings.
Old versions of Microsoft Paint may also work.
