.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020-2021 Donovan Watteau
.\"
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
.\" of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
.\" in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
.\" to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:
.\"
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in
.\" all copies or substantial portions of the Software.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
.\" LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
.\" OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN
.\" THE SOFTWARE.
.Dd $Mdocdate: November 19 2020 $
.Dt SCUMMRP 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm scummrp
.Nd pack and unpack SCUMM game data resources
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm scummrp
.Fl i
.Op Fl qvV
.Op Fl t Ar tag
.Fl g Ar gameid
.Fl p Ar gamedir
.Fl d Ar dumpdir
.Nm scummrp
.Fl o
.Op Fl qvV
.Op Fl t Ar tag
.Fl g Ar gameid
.Fl p Ar gamedir
.Fl d Ar dumpdir
.Nm scummrp
.Fl L
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
tool imports and exports game data resources for SCUMM engine games.
The mode of operation is chosen with one of the following options:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl i
Import resources into the game files.
.It Fl o
Export resources from the game files.
.It Fl L
List all supported games with their respective
.Ar gameid .
.El
.Pp
The other options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Dsgamedir
.It Fl d Ar dumpdir
The path to the dump directory (default:
.Pa DUMP ) .
Game content is represented as a hierarchy of multiple files and subdirectories.
If it doesn't exist, the directory will be created.
.It Fl g Ar gameid
The ID of the game variant to pack or unpack, as given by
.Fl L .
.It Fl p Ar gamedir
The path to the game (default: current directory).
.It Fl q
Quiet mode.
Suppress informational output.
.It Fl t Ar tag
Only export/import game resources matching the specified
.Ar tag .
A tag is the internal name of a resource type inside SCUMM,
such as
.Dq SCRP
or
.Dq CHAR .
.It Fl v
Verbose mode.
.It Fl V
Same as
.Fl v ,
but list resource names as they're being treated, too.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Dump all the resources of the original Monkey Island 2 game to the
.Pa DUMP_MI2
directory:
.Pp
.Dl $ scummrp -g monkey2 -p /path/to/MI2 -od DUMP_MI2
.Pp
Dump the script resources of the Talkie CD version of Loom, using
default paths:
.Pp
.Dl $ scummrp -g loomcd -t SCRP -o
.Sh SEE ALSO
descumm
.Pq Lk https://github.com/scummvm/scummvm-tools ,
NUTCracker
.Pq Lk https://github.com/BLooperZ/nutcracker ,
ScummPacker
.Pq Lk http://www.jestarjokin.net/apps/scummpacker/
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
tool was written in 2003 by Thomas Combeleran for the ATP team,
and was open-sourced in 2020 under the MIT license.
.Sh CAVEATS
On case-sensitive file systems, game data files must currently
follow the DOS convention of being all-uppercase to be properly
detected.
